[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Fear is the result of
getting caught in the middle.
Buddha says it's the
result of ignorance.
And the ignorance is
that when you start out
as an infant with an
undifferentiated awareness,
and then you are
taught who you are,
that structure which we call
ego is a very fragile structure.
And it's a structure
that is created
of learned neural patterns.
And it has on one
side of it what
Freud referred to as the
id or the impulse life.
And on the other hand is
this fragile structure
in the face of tremendous
forces externally,
which are parents, social
institutions, chaos
and storms and
nature, all of it,
and if you can sense
the way that works,
just see on one side of you
these extremely powerful
impulses in you
that you're afraid
of and on the other side the
tremendous forces outside
that you're afraid of
and feeling yourself
as a very fragile entity
within that structure.
When you didn't
have a framework,
when you didn't have
a "somebody-ness,"
you are just part
of the universe.
And there's no fear so
that the root of the fear
is the separateness.
The root of the fear is the
model one has of oneself.
That's where the fear starts.
Once that exists, then
you process everything
from inside or outside
in terms of that model.
And it keeps reinforcing the
feeling of vulnerability.
Because in fact, there
are incredibly powerful
forces outside and inside.
The transformative
process of spiritual work
is reawakening to the innocence
of going behind that model
that one had that cut oneself
off, that made oneself
a tiny, little,
fragile somebody.
You say I'm afraid of
being socially shamed.
But when you are socially
shamed, it hurts.
And then here we still are.
You're afraid of violence.
And then if violence
happens, sure.
It's scary and painful.
And then behind it, here we are.
Often, the fear
feeds upon itself.
And we're almost
afraid of the fear.
The fear is the thing rather
than what we're afraid of.
We're just afraid.
See, in a therapeutics
tradition, what you usually do
is try to figure out
what you're afraid of.
Another technique
is this witness
which merely sits with
the fear and tries
to get it before it
becomes so consuming
that there's no space left.
The image I usually use is
you got a painting of a cloud,
of a gray cloud
against a blue sky.
But you only had
one picture frame.
And it was little too small.
So what you did was you bent
the canvas around to frame it.
But in doing so, you
lost all the blue sky.
So you ended up with
just a framed gray.
It fills the entire frame.
So when you look around, you say
I'm afraid, or I'm depressed.
If you enlarge the
frame so that it
was a little--
even just a little
bit of that kind of
round thing of a cloud
and a little blue space,
you'd say, ah, a cloud.
That's what the witness is.
The witness is that
tiny, little blue
over in the corner that
leads you to say, ah, fear.
Often, we get so frightened,
we can't stop for a moment
to notice, ah, there's fear
because it's consumed us.
So the art is to keep
cultivating that witness,
continuously cultivating it
in all the opportunities you
have so that it is present
more and more of the time.
And when you focus
on the witness
rather than on the fear,
you see that there's
a part of you that is not
afraid but just noticing.
The noticer isn't judging.
It's not trying to change it.
It's not even afraid.
It's just noticing.
So in a way, recognizing that
there is a part of you that
always exists that is not
afraid and in the deeper,
mystical sense or transformative
or spiritual sense,
there is indeed a part of
you that is always not afraid
because there is a part of
you that was never separate.
How could you be afraid?
You are everything.
What could you be afraid of?
All it is transformation
of energy.
It's just like a tree
falling and then rotting
and then providing nurturance
for everything else
in the forest and going on.
And the tree isn't upset
about its change of state.
It is the process of death.
You're just seeing
transformation of energy.
Because once you get back
into the mystical root
being, your true
self, it doesn't
die because it wasn't born.
It just is.
So there's always a
place that is not afraid.
And that's what one works
to find in one's self.
[MUSIC PLAYING]